Everyone's rewriting everything in Rust
these days. Discord rewrote their
backend and got 10x performance. Dropbox
spent four years rewriting their sync
engine. Microsoft is putting Rust in
Windows itself, but Microsoft's own
TypeScript team looked at Rust and said,
"Nah, we'll use Go instead." Because it
was easier for them to port TypeScript
to Go. They answered this, but after
seeing Rust being brought up in every
discussion that isn't even about Rust,
it got me curious. Is Rust really that
good, or is it just all hype? So, I
decided not only to learn a good bit of
Rust over the past six months or so, but
take a look at the entire state of Rust
in 2025. What it actually is, no hype,
no buzzwords, but performance, memory
management, things like that. How it
compares to other languages, which I did
on a smaller scale, but I want to look
on a larger scale. Why people are
obsessed with it. It is quite literally
the most admired programming language.
what the actual experience is writing
Rust and where it falls short. Just a
whole look into Rust. That's this video.
Let's start with the basics. Rust is a
systems programming language that
promises something that sounds
impossible. Memory safety without
garbage collection. And why is that a
big deal? Well, in C or C++, you can do
something like this. Pointer equals
Malik. Free the pointer, then use it
again. This compiles fine, but it's a
security vulnerability waiting to
happen. 70% of Microsoft security bugs
come from memory safety issues just like
this. In languages like Java or Python,
you don't have this problem because the
garbage collector manages memory for
you. But that can come with performance
overhead and unpredictable pauses. In
Rust solves all of this with this little
thing called the borrow checker. Here's
the same concept in Rust. create a box,
drop it, try to use it. This doesn't
compile. The compiler catches the bug
before your code ever runs. No runtime
overhead, no garbage collector, but also
no memory safety bugs. The result is a
language that is just as fast as C, as
safe as Java, and as expressive as
Python. At least that's the promise.
Which begs the question, how does Rust
actually stack up against these other
systems programming languages? I did a
quick comparison building a little CLI
application in C, C++, Rust, Go, and
Zigg, and the differences are telling. C
gives you raw speed and complete
control, but you're managing memory
manually with Malak and free. One
mistake and you've got a seg fault or a
memory leak. C++ on the other hand adds
modern conveniences like vectors and
smart pointers, but you're drowning in a
bit of complexity. There are like six
different ways to do basically
everything. Go, on the other hand,
strips away all of that complexity for
simplicity and fast compilation.
However, you lose quite a bit of that
low-level control and some of the
performance. Although, people have been
arguing with me about this. You tell me
in the comments. And then Zigg.
Zigg has so much potential. It's like C,
but with better tooling, compile time
safety, but the ecosystem is just tiny.
and they've been in beta or whatever you
want to call it for I think eight or
nine years. And Zigg is very low level.
Basically, you're shaking hands with the
CPU, which you can buy at MicroEnter,
the sponsor of today's video, which as
you may know is the best place to buy PC
components, hardware, anything tech. And
that does include maker projects like
Raspberry Pies. You can get the Pi
itself, you can get the starter kits,
you can get the project kits, any
accessory that you can think of. Or
maybe you need a new laptop that has
really good GPU in it. And that is the
GeForce RTX50 series laptops lineup
available at MicroEnter, which as you
can see, they're having some really good
deals on which you can check out at
microcenter.com. Use the link in the top
of the description or if you're lucky
enough to have one close to you, go
there in person, take a look at their
cases, take a look at whatever you want,
everything that's there. It is. It's an
experience. It's worth going to. And if
you live in Phoenix, Arizona or near it,
you have one coming to you at the end of
2025 or early 2026. And what you can do
is sign up for their VIP days offer for
a free 128 GB flash drive. This will
also be linked below. Check out
MicroECenter for any of your tech, PC,
keyboard, whatever needs you have. Now,
let's get back to Rust. Rust sits in a
unique sweet spot. You get seale
performance and control, but the borrow
checker forces memory safety at compile
time. The trade-off is you're you're
fighting the compiler upfront and what
seems like neverending bugs. That may
just be me, but the alternative is
debugging crashes later, and I would
take the borrow checker all day long.
And are those the reasons why everyone
is going crazy over this language?
Maybe. But also the success stories are
genuinely wild. Discord has this read
state service and it was having 2-minute
garbage collection spikes in Go. Users
would just see Discord freeze. They
rewrote this service completely in Rust
and got a 10 times performance
improvement while completely eliminating
those garbage collection pauses. So, for
all of you that just commented how much
more performant Go is when I said it was
up for debate, well, that example wasn't
really in your favor. Another example of
Rust improving things was Dropbox.
Dropbox rewrote their entire desktop
sync engine, four years of work handling
hundreds of billions of files. Their
takeaway, Rust has been a force
multiplier in our team. So, I guess they
liked it. Microsoft's Azure CTO said,
"It's time to halt starting any new
projects in C or C++." We even made a
video about Bejorn Straw calling
everybody to help save C++ because new
projects were not being built in C++,
but instead people are choosing Rust.
This is one of those examples. These are
the people who wrote Windows in C++
calling for new projects to stop being
built in C++. They've also rewritten
major Windows components, 152,000 lines
of Rust for font rendering, seeing 5 to
15% performance improvements, but also
addressing the 70% security
vulnerabilities I previously mentioned.
AWS built Firecracker for serverless
computing with Rust. Web development is
even using Rust and you have frameworks
for Rust as well as runtimes and whatnot
being built in Rust. And of course, CLI
tools is that's where Rust really
shines. Tools like RIP, Grep, FD, BAT,
and X are so much faster than their
traditional Unix equivalents that people
are they're switching their entire tool
chains. When you can GP through a
massive code base in milliseconds
instead of many seconds, it changes how
you work. And if I were to try to list
all of the new things being rewritten in
Rust, this video would be a lot longer
than it is. So, we see the syntax
differences and the performance
differences and the memory management
and things of that nature. But what is
it actually like to write Rust code
daytoday because it has to be pleasant
to work with if it's so admired and
everybody wants to use it. Well, here's
a simple function to find the largest
item in a list. The syntax looks normal,
but there's a lot happening here. the
generic constraints, the borrowing
instead of owning, all verified at
compiled time via the borrowed checker,
which when you're learning Rust,
fighting the borrow checker, it it's a
real experience. You'll write code that
seems perfectly reasonable, and the
compiler will reject it, like creating a
vector, getting a reference to the first
element, then trying to push another
element. The compiler says you can't
modify the vector while you have a
reference to its contents. And then you
also got to figure out, do you use the
vec macro for this or do you use vector
for this? And that's neither here nor
there, but it's a rabbit hole that I had
to go down when I first started learning
Rust. The learning curve is real. I
coded everything purely as a Java dev
with four loops everywhere because I
didn't use or know any of their iterator
methods. But even aside from that, I'm
like, this is cool. Rust prevents bugs.
Borrow checker catches everything real
quick. But then I'm like, okay, why
won't this compile? This should be
simple. Then I'm like, okay, maybe I
should actually learn what the heck
ownership is. And then I'm like, oh, I
get this now. The compiler is actually
helping me and not preventing me. And
I'm like, oh, all of those years of C++,
how did I ever survive? But here's the
thing is most people say that it takes 3
to 6 months just to get comfortable with
the borrow checker. That's a significant
investment of time. But I'm inclined to
say it's worth it because the tooling is
excellent. Cargo just works. Wow. But
it's not all sunshine and rainbows.
Cargo is very opinionated. Whereas
Gradel, you can build anything, any
infrastructure, whatever you want that
your heart desires. So there's a give
and a take. Gradle is something you
never outgrow. Whereas cargo, I haven't
built anything big enough to really
tell. But that that's enough about Java
and stuff. I'll talk about Java in the
next video actually because Java just
turned 30 years old this year as did I.
Anyway, back to Cargo. So, Cargo, the
error messages actually really help you.
They're really good. They help you fix
the problems instead of just telling you
something is wrong. But compilation
times can be rough. Even small projects
take 15 to 20 seconds to compile. Coming
from other languages with hot reload,
this can kind of break up your workflow.
But since you use AI to write all of
your code anyway, you're probably used
to it by now. Even the creator of Flash
said, "I really feel like the Rust
community suffers from a collective
Stockholm syndrome when it comes to
compile times." But anyway, if Rust is
so great, all of these things raving
reviews and this and that, why isn't
everyone using it? First, it's because
the learning curve is not just about
time, but it's also about mindset.
Because Rust forces you to think about
ownership in borrowing and lifetimes
explicitly. If you're coming from
garbage collected languages like me,
this is a completely different mental
model. I've heard one person put this
perfectly. They said, "I've seen junior
devs excel at Rust with no prior
training and senior engineers struggle
for weeks or even months or given up
entirely." Because it's not about
intelligence. It's not even about
overall programming experience. It's
whether or not your brain will click
with Rust's way of thinking. And the 3
to 6 month on boarding times means that
you can't just hire somebody and expect
immediate productivity, which creates
unacceptable bottlenecks. And not only
that, but integration into existing
systems, it can be challenging. If you
already have Java ornet or C++
investments, the cost of a Rust
integration might not justify the
benefits. And then there's that
complexity question because Rust does
have a lot of concepts like ownership
and borrowing and lifetimes and traits
and generics and macros and async await.
Each one makes sense. It does. But
together they create that steep learning
curve that we discussed. JavaScript
developers joke about framework fatigue,
right? Well, Rust has concept fatigue.
And all of this brings us to the
fascinating Rust rejection stories
because sometimes it is a better
decision to not use the better
programming language like how Typescript
chose to port to Go instead of Rust. The
team acknowledges that they like Rust,
but their goal was to use the lowest
level language possible that they could
ship in a reasonable time. But simply
put, if they wanted to port TypeScript
to Rust, it would have taken them many
years. whereas porting it to go took
them about a year or so. And they tried
because again they like rust but every
approach they tried required dropping
into lots of unsafe code or devolved
into write your own garbage collection
style strategies. And the TypeScript dev
lead that said that also said Rust
succeeds wildly at its design goals but
is straightforward to port to Rust from
this particular Java codebase is very
rationally not one of its design goals.
So yeah, Rust is amazing at what it
does, but what it does isn't always what
you need. But the reason I needed to
address that is because every single
time someone doesn't choose Rust or says
something about another programming
language, they say, "Why not Rust?" But
Rust, it is excellent for performance
critical systems for security sensitive
applications and longunning services. It
might not be right for rapid prototyping
or teams with tight deadlines or
projects with extensive legacy
integration requirements. The ecosystem
is mature in systems programming and CLI
tools, but not so much in guey
development and machine learning. And
while the community continues to grow,
adoption is not uniform. You want speed
to market, you use Go. You want to
create games, you use C++ for ecosystem.
Here's my take. Rust it. It It is a
genuinely impressive technology solving
real problems at scale. The performance
numbers are real and the safety benefits
are measurable. But technology isn't a
zero sum game. Different problems need
different solutions and organizational
context matters more than technical
benchmarks. You can't just always say,
should I use Rust? Everyone should use
Rust. But like what problems are we
trying to solve? What are the tradeoffs
of one language to the next? and choose
what is best for your use case. I know
it's simple, but it's again something
that needs to be addressed. So, is Rust
all hype? No. It's worthy of the hype.
Maybe not as much as it gets because
again, everything doesn't need to be
Rust, but that's fine. Rust is carving
out strategic positions where its unique
combination of performance and safety
and reliability provides clear business
value. That's not hype. That's
sustainable technology adoption. But I
feel like I've said the same five things
over and over again over this conclusion
here. So tell me what you think. Have
you tried Rust? Do you like it? Uh and
do you think it's worth the hype? That's
all I got.